Thank you.
Thank you for all coming here.
Thank you for being part of the
experience and the renovation,
rejuvenation, revolution that Apple's
going through right now.
It's an incredible
time to be a developer.
It's an incredible time
to be an Apple employee,
and especially for AppleScript.
Over the last year,
AppleScript has progressed more and
more and grown faster and faster.
It's just on fire.
And with the evolution of
AppleScript becoming a peer
development language with
Objective-C and Java and Cocoa,
Carbon, and the rest of it,
and the development tools and Xcode,
we have pushed farther and grown faster,
and we're reaching farther
and farther every day.
We want to deliver more
for you with AppleScript,
and we want to be able
to be your hand-to-hand.
We want to be able to get your hands
and fingers into the world to get
the things done that make you money,
because this is all about money.
Well, some of it's about fun,
but some of it's about money
and making sure that you're
successful at what you do.
AppleScript Studio can be a great part
and a component of that process for you
in that it can combine disparate parts of
code and resources and put them together
in a way that not only makes your users
and customers satisfied and easy to use,
but it can also be a great way
to make your users and customers
satisfied and easy to use.
But it can also deliver a
lot of power under the hood.
So today you're going to see an
overview of some of the new things
that are in AppleScript Studio,
plus a good portion of what
AppleScript Studio can do
in its new environment.
And to do that,
we have a couple people today that
are the key to this technology.
First is Tim Bumgarner,
who is the senior engineer
for AppleScript Studio.
He's the brains and execution behind it.
And the man behind the man,
he couldn't be the man without the man,
is John Coelho, venerable.
And he's the man behind the
AppleScript Studio guide
and source and sage.
So with that, I'll let Tim take it away.
Thank you.
All right, thanks, Sal.
Well,
I was thinking about last year's session,
and I just knew what I started
my session out last year
would come back to haunt me,
because if you'll remember,
I had a slide that came out and said,
maybe I'd consider myself Mr.
AppleScript Studio.
And of course, the acronym was ASS,
and I would be known as Mr.
Ass.
And sure enough, somebody walks up to me,
a colleague, and says,
I'd like to introduce you to my friend,
and this is Mr.
Ass.
Great.
So I think I'm going to go with Mr.
Studio.
So the worst you can call me is Mr.
S.
And that's a subtle difference,
but important.
The other thing I noticed when I went
through my session last year is that
I talked a million miles an hour.
And hopefully I can slow down.
But my apologies to the
language translator,
because I have no clue
how she kept up last year.
Great.
So let's go ahead and get started
and talk about AppleScript Studio.
And hopefully we'll have
good luck with the clicker.
must be the bane of our
existence in AppleScript.
We had the same problem
in AppleScript Studio,
or the AppleScript updates, so.
Okay, looks like the slide
is probably at the end,
and it's the wrong one that's loaded,
so we didn't get the right slide.
Try this again.
Okay, simple enough to fix.
If this is the worst that happens to me,
I'm pretty happy.
All right.
This way we get to see the
nice movie fronting along.
I knew we were missing something there.
Okay.
And Sal's already been here?
I'm here?
We're all here.
Let's get going.
Okay, so let's talk about the agenda.
And what we're going to do is a
little bit of an introduction.
We'll go through a little overview.
I'm not going to go through
the detail I did last year.
Hopefully enough of you have used it
and looked at it to know how it works,
but we'll just do a quick
demonstration of how to do that.
Now, last year we were talking
about what was in Studio 1.1.
We also previewed a little bit
about what was in Studio 1.2.
We weren't able to actually show you
the features because we hadn't shipped
Jaguar yet or were far enough along.
And so we're going to go
through some of those important
key features that we added in
Studio 1.2 in the Jaguar timeframe.
In Studio 1.3, we're going to talk about
what we're releasing for the
upcoming Panther release.
And some of these things are
already in the preview release,
and we'll talk about that in a bit.
And then we'll just discuss a
little again about future features.
documentation, and Q&A.
Introduction.
What is AppleScript Studio?
And so what we've done is we've
taken a combination of all
these wonderful technologies.
We've taken advantage of AppleScript,
and we've integrated it into
every one of these technologies.
We've integrated it into Xcode.
It was in Project Builder
in the previous versions.
We moved it right directly
straight into Xcode.
And insidiously enough,
we've even inserted
ourselves even deeper.
It's a requirement.
It has to be there.
We've also, through a palette,
have been able to integrate
into Interface Builder.
And then all of that is built on top
of the Cocoa Application Frameworks.
And so we get the advantage of
everything that Cocoa provides.
But it's also two things.
It's the development environment.
It's where you get to go in and
you develop your application.
And then it's also a runtime,
so that when you get
your application built,
you can send it out,
put it out on the web,
distribute it through your company,
and then anybody can just run it.
They don't need any extra extensions.
They don't need any additions,
any plugins.
It just works.
And that makes it really terrific
to do that for deployment.
So what can you do with Studio?
First and foremost, we're creating native
Macintosh applications.
It's, for all fundamental purposes,
is a Cocoa application.
But it uses AppleScript as
the development language.
And we get to take advantage of
everything that Cocoa provides.
We get all of the wonderful table views,
outline views, buttons, widgets,
you name it, we've got it.
We can script those.
And of course, with AppleScript,
we really get to leverage.
We get to take advantage of being able to
create solutions that uses applications
that are local to my computer.
I can talk to other applications
that are across the network or
even out through the internet and
take advantage of the next thing,
which are web services.
Just like we talk to a local application,
we can talk to a web service.
We simply say tell application,
and using XML, RPC, and SOAP,
we can go get data from that
and populate and provide a
front end to it with a nice UI.
Sal Soghoian, Tim Bumgarner, John Coehrer
And then we can go down
to a very deeper level.
And since Mac OS X is
basically a Unix-like operating
system built on top of that,
we can take advantage of the do shell
script that AppleScript gives us.
And you can go down and you can put a
nice wrapper around some of those gnarly
terminal applications or code pieces
and fundamentally put something that
people just wouldn't usually understand.
They could use a really nice,
simple UI to do that.
And then, of course,
with being inside of Xcode,
Xcode allows you to build C applications,
C++.
We can use Objective-C.
We can use Java.
Any of those languages we can actually
call directly from inside of AppleScript.
And with some of the process or
progress that's being made with
AppleScript itself at Cocoa level,
you can turn around and
from those other languages,
particularly Cocoa,
you can actually create an
AppleScript and then talk back
into your Studio application.
So it's a bit of a round trip,
which is great.
So a little bit of an overview.
Let's talk about where we've been.
bed.
Studio 1.0 was released.
We came out with that in our
December 2001 developer tools.
And that was, I believe,
Mac OS X version 10.1.2.
So you can run your Studio apps
from that time forward.
Then we released in April,
about four months later,
we released our 1.1 release
in the April developer tools.
And then we, of course, released 1.2,
which was a big feature release
in the Jaguar of last year.
And there was a point release,
some bug fixes that we needed to get in,
went out in the December tools.
And then, of course,
we're going to talk about
AppleScript Studio 1.3.
A little point of clarification.
I want to make sure that
everybody understands that
what went out in the developer
preview release is exactly that.
The Studio 1.3 is just a preview release.
It's not finished.
It will be finished as part of Panther.
So it's a sneak preview
for you to look at it,
use it, take advantage of some
of the new features,
but you really can't deploy any
applications until Panther goes to GM.
And so what I'd like to do
is show you how easy it is to
create a Studio application.
And if we look at it,
we basically go through the same cycle.
We create a project in Xcode,
we open up the interface,
lay it out the way we want to,
we name our objects,
attach some handlers, we edit the script,
we build and run,
and then just go through the cycle,
making sure, adding to it and enhancing
that application.
So I'd like to actually go right to that,
and we will demonstrate
how easy that is to do.
So if we can go to the demo machine.
Excellent.
So I'm going to go right into Xcode,
and I'm going to choose
New Project from the File menu.
And you can see that Xcode
itself is able to create all
kinds of different applications.
There's applications, bundles,
frameworks, Java, tools, you name it,
we've got it.
The first three are the ones, of course,
great with AppleScript, starting with A.
We always get to go at
the head of the class.
And we've got three different
types of project templates here.
We have the AppleScript application,
we have a document-based application
if we want multiple documents,
and then we have something
we call a droplet.
It's very similar to the applet that
you would create with Script Editor.
So I'm, in this case,
going to just choose the
AppleScript application.
And we're going to use, of course,
the good old standby, our Hello World.
And I'll name that project.
And the first thing I do is I'm
going to go right into the nib file,
our main menu dot nib,
and work on the interface.
Since this is Hello World,
there's not much interface.
As a matter of fact,
I'm actually going to get rid of this
default window that you see here.
I'm just going to go
ahead and delete that.
And then I'm going to go
to the Show Info panel,
and I'm going to select this Files Owner.
This represents the application object.
And any time you want to do anything with
AppleScript inside of Interface Builder,
you go to the AppleScript Inspector,
and that's in this case is
Command 7 as a shortcut.
And I notice that there
are different aspects here.
We have our name field.
This lets me name objects.
Whenever you reference
something inside of AppleScript,
there are several different
ways that you can do that,
and one of them is by name,
and that's the most recommended.
You could also do it by index or by ID.
And then the next section
shows us the event handlers.
These are the handlers that are related
to the object that is currently selected.
So if I had a button selected,
it would have a different
set of event handlers.
And then down finally at the
last is the script section.
This shows us all the scripts
that are in the script.
So if you see over here, we have a
HelloWorld.AppleScript back in Xcode.
So what I want to find out is
when the application is launched.
So what I simply do is go in and
click on the launched event handler.
I go down, attach it to this HelloWorld,
which is our application script,
and then I'm going to click
the Edit Script button.
And when I do that,
it jumps me back over into Xcode,
and it selects the contents
of the onLaunched handler.
It actually inserted that for me,
so I don't have to remember what the
parameters are or how it's spelled.
I just choose it,
and it inserts it for me.
And we're going to go with about
the simplest bit of code that
you can write in AppleScript,
and it's just display dialog, HelloWorld.
And then when that dialogue is done,
I'm just going to go ahead and
tell the application to quit.
I don't want to have to quit it.
I just want it to go away.
So we're going to go ahead and save that.
And then from the Build menu,
we're going to go ahead
and choose Build and Run.
And it's going to go ahead and it
compiles the .appleScript file,
links it, and then runs it.
And there you go.
You've got the display dialog.
And so when I go ahead and choose OK,
the application actually
quits and finishes.
That's just as simple as it is to create,
you know, obviously a very simple app.
But from here, it's the same process.
Edit the interface, attach your handlers,
edit your script, build and run,
and then just keep
building and keep building.
All right.
So we go back to slides, please.
Okay, so let's talk about some of the
Studio 1.2 features that we added in
the Jaguar that we didn't get a chance
to actually demonstrate and talk about,
but they're really important
and they were some of the most
requested features that we had.
And the first is drag-and-drop support,
and then also pasteboard support,
data source enhancements,
and document-based applications.
And so we're going to go
through each of these features,
and what we're going to do is we're going
to develop an application from start to
finish that employs and builds upon and
adds each of these features as we go.
So let's talk about
drag-and-drop support.
We've got a series of new event handlers.
There's actually about six of them here,
I believe.
There's a drag-entered, exit,
and updated.
This is while you're dragging
objects across a view.
There's a drop, which is the one that we
almost always care about.
That's the only one
that's the most important.
There's a prepare-drop-conclude.
These happen before and
after the drop handler.
We've also added a new command or
variant on the command register.
We need to be able to tell the view
what is it that we want to listen for.
What kind of drop do we want?
What type of data?
And so we do that with
the register drag types.
So in order to help me with this,
I'm going to bring up John Coelho.
He's our QA engineer for Studio,
and he's going to help me
make sure I don't mess up.
So let's welcome him up.
So what we're going to do,
and for the sake of time,
we don't have time to lay out everything
as far as the interface is concerned.
So we're going to go ahead and
we've already laid out a project,
but we haven't added any script yet.
So we're just going to
bring up the interface.
So let's go ahead and double
click on document.nib.
And you'll see that what we have
here is our application is going
to be a document-based application.
It's going to present a window
that has a table view on the top.
It's in a split view,
and below the bottom is a text view.
And so what we're going to be
able to do is drag files from
the finder into the table view.
It'll list that information
in the table view,
and then in the bottom,
we'll actually have a script.
We can put in some AppleScript,
and when we're all done,
we're going to be able to build
and execute that AppleScript for
every item in the table view.
So this is something in an app
that we're calling Batch Processor.
So let's go ahead and take a look at it.
We're going to start
attaching some scripts to it.
So we see that we've named
some objects already,
and we've named the table view.
And we can tell that we've got the
table view selected because you can
see that it has the table view name
up in the title of the info panel.
And what we're going to look for is that
there's a category called drag and drop.
And so he's going to check
the drop event handler for us.
And then also, when the nib is loaded,
we want to set and make sure that we
register for a particular type of drag.
So let's go ahead and click the drag.
The Awake from Nib.
And then, okay,
we're going to attach this to
our document.AppleScript file.
So let's go ahead and
we'll edit the script now.
So he's going to fill out.
Now, lest you think that John's
the world's fastest typer,
we're actually using something
called Demo Assistant.
It's a sample that ships with
Mac OS X and the developer tools.
Allows you to do this
fancy little command too,
and we populate all the script for you.
And so he's filled out
the Awake from Nib,
and let's go ahead and
fill out the onDrop,
and then we'll talk about that.
Okay,
so let's look at the onAwake from Nib.
And you can see we have
the tell the object,
in this case the object
is the table view,
to register for drag types,
and we want the file names.
We could pass it a full list.
We could pass it string, color, font.
There's a lot of different
types that you can register for.
In this case, we just want file names.
Now, up in the onDropped handler,
you'll see that we have
simply just a display dialog,
because we're just going to test this.
We're going to drag in some files,
and what we should get when we're
done is a dialog popping up.
So let's go ahead and build and run this,
John.
Okay, so the application comes up,
and he's going to go into the finder,
and we're going to show a kind
of cool Mac OS X thing we can do.
We can go to our AppleScript Studio's
examples and go into the little
search field and type .pbproj,
and it will quickly filter
all of the project files,
because when we're done,
we're actually going to build some
things using some Xcode scriptability.
So now he's going to move that over,
drag those files in.
As you see now, as he's dragging that
over the table view,
you get the little plus indicator
indicating that it actually drops.
If you were to try to drag
it over the text view,
you see nothing because we've only
registered for a drag in the table view.
So go ahead and drop those in, John.
And there you go.
We've got the drop
handler just got executed.
Okay, so that's how easy it is to
add and at least get notified
that a drop has happened.
So can we go back to slides, please?
Okay.
Okay, now that's great.
So we've got a drop happening.
We've got the right kind of data,
at least we hope so,
and this is what we're going to find out.
So in order to support drag and drop,
we had to do the next step.
We had to expose the pasteboard class.
And so we've done that,
and it actually has a
series of named pasteboards.
There's a general pasteboard,
a drag pasteboard, find.
If you ever notice in Cocoa,
you do a find in one app.
For better or worse,
that same find is in another Cocoa app,
and we can actually script that as well.
And we also then have a
preferred contents property.
You can put data on a pasteboard
in a lot of different formats.
It can have strings, files, lists,
images.
This way we can say,
we want this type of data in this format,
and we can get and set it
in that particular format.
So what we're going to do is
demonstrate a little bit using
bringing up our new Script Editor and
having the application still running.
We're going to look and find out
what we can about pasteboards.
So John's going to use the
contextual menu on Script Editor,
and he's going to actually insert some
script in a tele-application block,
and he's going to type
in batch processor.
And then he's going to fill out,
and we're going to just
ask it for the pasteboards.
What pasteboards do you
have in your application?
And when he goes ahead
and checks and runs that,
you'll see down in the result window
that we have a series of pasteboards.
They're all named.
There's a general, there's a font, find,
and drag.
And the one that we're going
to test at the moment is just
look at the general pasteboard.
So let's see what the things there are
about a pasteboard that are interesting.
So let's look at the
properties of the pasteboard.
Here we go.
We're going to look at
the particular pasteboard.
We're going to do it by name.
So we'll go ahead and run that.
And you'll see that there is
actually a lot of different
types of data on that pasteboard.
Some of it is listed as rich text,
string.
There's also some Carbon types.
Don't ask me what they are,
but they're there if you need them.
And then there's also the
different type of class.
The preferred type in this
case is defaults to string.
And the contents at the
moment has the string general.
And so we can actually go ahead and
change the contents of the pasteboard.
And we'll do a set contents
of pasteboard general.
And he's going to go ahead and run that.
And then he'll just
choose paste somewhere,
and you'll see that it
now has that variable.
Now, there's a reason why
I demonstrated this for you.
And this is a great tool
while developing studio apps.
They're live, they're running,
they're scriptable.
You can easily delve in,
use it as a great debugging tool
to figure out where your views are,
why something is or isn't responding.
And so this is a great way to do that.
So let's go ahead and we'll quit that.
We'll quit Project Builder.
I'm sorry, I knew I'd do that.
Xcode, our batch processor,
and the other application,
our script editor.
And let's go back in,
and we're going to fill
out the drop handler.
So we'll get rid of that display dialog.
And we'll go ahead and let
John put all these lines in,
and then we'll quickly talk about them.
Now, so what's going to happen is
that the drop is going to happen,
and you'll see up there that
there's a variable called dragInfo,
and that's a type of called dragInfo.
And it has a couple different things.
It has one of them,
and the one we care about is
it has the pasteboard property.
And so what we're going to do is
we're going to find out the types that
are in the pasteboard of this drag.
And then we want to go on to the next
line and make sure that what we have in
that list or array is the file names.
So let's go on down to it.
It's hard to see on this monitor,
so I'll look over here.
And we're going to set
the preferred type.
We want to make sure that we get the data
out of that pasteboard as file names.
And then we're going to simply get
the contents and put it in a list.
And in this case,
we're going to just display a dialog,
show the fact that we got the
data that we were expecting.
So let's go ahead and build and run this,
John.
compiles and launches,
and he's going to drag that out.
We'll open up our list of files again.
and this time as he adds it,
we'll get a dialogue that lists
the fact that we're actually,
we're not getting files or aliases,
but we're getting full POSIX paths.
Typically everything in Studio works
because it's built on top of
CocoaScript and currently works
in the Notion and POSIX paths.
We're hoping to unify that
in some future release.
So let's go ahead.
and go back.
And now,
we'll go on to the back to the slides,
please.
So that talks about the pasteboard.
So now we've done the drag.
We got the data out of it,
out of the pasteboards.
Now we need to do something with it.
We need to populate that table and
put the data so that you can see that.
And the way that we do
that is with data sources.
And we've made some enhancements.
There were several issues that came up,
and we've listened to that,
and we tried to fix as
many things as we could.
And one of them was Make New.
We wanted to be able to support
Make New for data sources.
You used to have to go in,
drag this funny-looking cube thing out,
make a connection.
It was about a page and a
half of documentation to do.
And you had to describe
something that should be simple.
What we did is made it very simple.
You just simply say Make New Data Source,
and you get your new
data source in one line.
We also found that it
wasn't terribly fast,
creating new data rows individually,
populating the data cells.
And we found that we could just
simply do it with an append command.
You give it an append command
with a list of records,
AppleScript records,
and it does it all for you very,
very quickly, much faster than you
could do it yourself.
We also added sorting support,
so you could sort the data sources.
And you can pick out which
is the default sort column,
if they have ascending, descending,
what type of sort that they will have.
And so we'll take a look at that.
So we're going to go on to the next step.
So let's go back to our demo machine.
And so what we're going to do is we're
going to go back to our wake from nib.
And when the table view
is loaded from the nib,
we need to set some things up
in order to make this happen.
And so again, I'll just let John go
ahead and fill those out,
and then we'll come back
and we'll talk about that.
So the idea is we're going
to create a data source.
We're going to create a data column
that matches every table view column
that we had in our table view.
And then after that, when we do the drag,
we'll later add the data
rows that go with that.
So let's take a look at
that make new data source.
Okay, you can see that we make a new
data source and we put it at
the end of the data source.
AppleScript always wants to know where
to put things when you make them.
Quite often there's a default place.
In this case,
we needed to specify that to put
it at the end of the data sources.
The next section just creates
all of our data columns,
again using make new.
And we actually pass a few
different parameters to it.
Name, we have to name each
of these data columns.
And this is an important thing to
remember when you're using data sources.
The name of each data column has
to match the AppleScript name
of the table view column.
And that's how it does all of
its magic in matching it up.
If they're named correctly
or they don't match,
it won't work.
You won't get any data in your column.
So you have to make
sure those are correct.
And there's also some sort information
you can specify for a data source,
whether it's ascending or descending,
alphabetical or numerical,
and some other data.
So let's go on and
look at the rest of it.
Okay, the next thing you need to do
is to tell it that it is sorted.
Because you could go ahead and set
everything up and then turn off
sorting or turn it off as you like.
And you simply do that
by setting the property.
And then the next thing we
want to do is make sure we
set the sort column for that.
And then the very last thing and
the most important is to hook it up.
So we basically set the data source
property again of the object,
which is the table view,
to this new data source that we created.
All right.
And then what we're going to do is we're
going to go replace that display dialog.
So we've got our data
source all ready to go,
and we're going to add a few
lines here to replace that.
And we want to make sure
that we got at least one file
dropped onto our table view.
And then we're going to call this
handler called add files to data source.
And we're going to go add
that down at the end here.
And you can see that it's a local
handler that we're going to call.
We're going to pass it the files,
and we're going to pass it the
data source that we want to
append this information to.
And we'll go to the first line.
It's an important line, the setup date.
I'll go ahead and add the next piece,
John.
Okay, and let's take a look at the
update views of data source.
Whenever you're going to put a
bunch of data into the data source,
you want to make sure that you
turn off the updating of views.
Otherwise,
what will happen is in the table view,
you'll see them individually added.
And not only is it distracting
to see them individually added,
but it's much slower.
So turn those off.
Go into a repeat loop.
We make each new data row.
We're going to store away a
reference to that full file path.
We're going to set the
contents of each data cell,
because what happens is
when we make a new data row,
it creates for you a new data row.
So we're going to call it a table view,
a named data cell for every row.
There's a cell for every table
or data row in the column.
Okay, and then we'll go down and we're
going to set the contents of the
name one in this particular case.
And we're going to use call method.
And I remember I told you
that we could actually use
Objective-C or other languages.
And there happens to be this
wonderful little utility class
on Objective-C and as string.
And it's a last path component.
What it does is it takes a posix
path and gives me the last item.
I don't have to worry about
parsing the slashes or the colons.
And with a simple little call method,
I can directly message the object
and it will get it of the item again.
So, I think we're ready, John?
You ready?
All right, let's build and run that.
So we're getting closer, getting closer,
building this application.
So now when it's up and running,
he's going to go in there,
drag some files, and you can see, voila,
we've added our files,
and they've all shown up,
all parsed correctly.
And it has our date modified filled out,
our name filled out in the path,
and the status we'll
take care of in a minute.
Now you'll notice that John's going
to try clicking on the columns.
Well, we said it'd be sorted,
but unfortunately we
forgot one thing to add.
And we're not recognizing the
fact that the column got clicked,
so we need to add that event handler.
So we'll go back into our
document bib in Interface Builder,
and we'll go to the Data View categories.
and we'll look for,
I know that there's one in
there called Column Clicked,
and we want to select that one.
And it's already attached to
the document as AppleScript,
so we'll click our Edit Script.
Now, the script that he's inserting
here is pretty much boilerplate.
Any time that you're going to
do sorting on a table view,
just go copy this code.
There's examples already that we
ship that has this bit of script.
And it basically looks at it, says, "Oh,
what was the last column?
If it's the last sorted
column is different,
switch to that and make
that the primary column.
If it's the same one,
just switch the ordering." So it's
something that we'll do there.
What we'd like to do is make
this even more automatic,
excuse me,
automatic so that it just happens.
You don't have to worry
about clicking on the,
or doing a click tantrum,
we'll try to do that for you.
So I think that should be it for sorting,
John.
Let's go ahead and go and run that.
Okay, let's drag out some items.
See what we got.
Drag out a few more.
And we just keep adding as we like,
and you'll notice now as it clicks
that it actually changes the
ascending and descending order.
If it clicks on a different column,
we can change the type and date modified.
Now you'll notice there's
no little indicator.
I'm hoping that Cocoa puts
that in there for us,
but I'll probably have to put that
in there myself so that you'll know
which way that those are sorting.
So again,
those are as much as we can do for you,
that's what we want to do.
So that takes care of doing the
data source support with supporting.
So let's go back to the slides, please.
Okay.
In the process of
building this application,
we started out with a document-based app.
And what we wanted to do ultimately
is to be able to save those files
that we drug in there plus the
script and save it as a document,
and then we could open it
up and process this later.
And there are two ways that
you can do document-based
support in AppleScript Studio.
One is there's two event handlers
that are high-level event handlers,
and there are two low-level.
Now, the high-level are the easiest ones.
Well, they're both pretty easy,
but the first two are the easiest,
and those are the ones
that are on by default.
This is when you, what you'll do is data
representation gets called when
the document is about to be saved,
and you just return the data that
you want saved in the document.
You don't have to worry about writing
the file or anything like that.
You just pass back the
AppleScript data that you want saved.
Then when the document is opened,
you go to the load data
representation handler gets called,
and it passes back to you the data that
you gave it when it was saved before.
So then you simply update
your UI with that data.
Now, if it's important to you to actually
be concerned about how each byte
is read from the disk or the format
or the structure of the file,
you can use the low-level event handlers,
and you just get past the
POSIX path to the file,
and you can write out the data,
and then you can read
the data back yourself.
In this case, we're going to use the
high-level event handlers.
They're exclusive, though.
You can't pick and choose.
You either have to go high
or you have to go low.
So we're going to go high.
So let's switch back to our demo machine.
And you'll see that this particular,
since we chose a document-based
application project,
it already starts out with
those two handlers checked.
So we don't have to go into the
document app or NIV and turn them on.
They're already there.
We're just going to go
ahead and fill them out.
So let's fill out the
data representation one.
I'll let them put that in.
And again, remember,
this will get called when it's
time to save your application.
And the object represents
the document object,
and of type just tells you what type
of file that you might want to save.
And you can set up for multiple types.
In this case, we just have the default.
And he's going to fill out
the load data representation,
and we'll quickly talk about those.
Let's go back up to the first one.
And so the first thing we
do is we have the document.
What we really need to do is get the
data out of the table view or out of
the data source of the table view.
And we can do that by using the
window elements of a document.
So we get window one of that document.
And then we go ahead and get
the table view and get the data
source out of the table view.
And then we're going to get the
associated object of every data row.
This is the thing I love
about AppleScript.
This one single line saves me
from repeating over things.
I just say,
give me this property of every
single one of those data rows.
So what we get back is originally
what we were given in the drop that
we get a list of files of POSIX paths.
So then we'll get the contents
of the text view because we also
want to save out the script.
And then we want to return that.
So look at what we're returning
is we are returning the files to
process and we're returning the
script as an AppleScript record.
So that when load data
representation happens,
that's what we're going
to get passed back in.
We're going to get passed
back in an AppleScript record
that has those two elements.
So let's go ahead and look at
the load data representation.
Basically the same thing.
Need to get the window,
need to get the data source.
And then we're going to use that
same handler that we had before,
the add files to data source.
Okay.
So we'll have exactly
the same format of data.
And then let's take a look and then we'll
set the contents of the script view.
So let's go ahead and build and
run this and see if it works.
Okay, so we got our view,
we got our table view ready to go.
We'll open up our files,
drag some files in.
And then we'll actually go modify
the script because it always
comes up with a default script,
so you'll see that we're actually
going to be saving a different script.
And let's choose a save
from the file menu.
And we'll give it a name.
and save that.
And we already had one there before.
That's okay.
We'll go ahead and close it now.
And then we're going
to go to the File menu,
and we'll go to Open Recent,
and we're going to choose
that file we just saved.
And there you go.
We've opened back up the files and the
script with just very little script.
Okay.
So let's go back to the slides, please.
So those are the 1.2 features.
So we were able to drag and drop,
be able to get the
data from a pasteboard.
We were able to add data to the
table view through the data source
with the enhancements we made,
and then very easily create
a document from that,
which is far simpler than we
had in our earlier releases.
So now what I'd like to do is talk
about some of the features that
we're releasing in Studio 1.3.
Drum roll, please.
What is it?
Well, it may look like a short list,
but it's a very, very important list.
And the first one is a script property,
and the second one is plug-in support,
and we're going to show you that
with some Xcode scriptability.
Let's talk about that first one.
This is the one I'm most excited about.
It's really going to have a great,
terrific impact on the way that
you write Studio applications.
The fact is, every object,
any Cocoa Inessence masked object,
gets a script property so that you can
do things like access the properties or
globals or event handlers of a script.
So you can imagine that you have a
foo property on a script on a button.
So now you can say foo
of script of button one.
Or if we're able to step over the script,
you'll just be able to say foo of
button one and get that property.
Or set foo of button
one to some new value.
So you can imagine,
instead of these big monolithic scripts
that we've had to write in the past,
that you can have very small scripts
because now it's very easy to
talk to scripts of other objects.
And we can call their handlers as well.
The other cool thing is that you
can take those scripts and you
can set new ones dynamically.
You can change during runtime.
You can set a button to actually
have a different unclicked
handler or a new menu item,
if you like,
and be able to create those things on
the fly and have different behaviors.
And another cool thing is that
external applications can access
that same script property.
So you can have another studio
app or some other script
editor or script running,
and you can get the properties,
the globals, and the handlers of that
running studio application.
So you can now call back in to a studio
application and execute that event
handler using AppleScript Studio.
All right, we'd like to demonstrate
just a little bit about that.
And this is going to put the
finishing touches on the last of
our batch processor demonstration.
So what we'd like to do is go
into our main menu nib this time,
because we're going to hook
some handlers to our file menu.
And you'll see that there are two
menu items already added for us.
One is process all,
and the other one is process selected.
So we want to be able to just easily
choose a menu item and have all of
those items in our table view processed.
So the first thing we have
to do is we have to name it.
We just name it so that we
can refer to it by name,
and I'll show you why in a second.
Then we want to make sure we have
the Choose Menu item selected,
and we're going to attach it this
time to the application script,
which is our batch-to-border.AppleScript.
And we'll do the same
thing for the selected.
Okay, we'll choose our menu
item and add it to that.
Let's go ahead and edit our script.
Now, we have two menu items.
They're both going to
execute the same handler,
at least the way that we
set it up at the moment.
And so we need to know
which one was chosen.
And the way we do that is we
use the name of the object.
So go ahead and finish that out,
and we'll take a look at
it when you're finished.
And this is a common practice.
We do this a lot.
You'll have four or five
buttons in a window,
and they're all going to
call the same click handler.
So the easiest thing to do is just
to look at the name of the object
and do something appropriately.
Remember back to what I talked about,
the script property in the next
release is that we're going to be
able to even make smaller ones.
You can have four different scripts,
one for each button,
doing their own thing.
You won't have to do this if naming,
but we didn't get into demo this today.
So let's go ahead and look at that.
So we get the, again,
we get the window of the front document,
we get the table view,
and then this is the fun part.
We get the script of the front document.
Remember document.AppleScript?
We're going to get that script object,
and then we're going to be able to
call a handler in that AppleScript.
In this case, when it's for the all menu,
we're going to call process
all files of table view,
and then on the else case,
we're checking to see if
it was the selected items.
And then we go through,
and we get the window,
get the table view,
and we get the script again.
And this time,
we're going to do the same thing.
We're going to call a different handler.
We're going to call
process selected files.
So let's go ahead and save this document.
We'll go and add that handler
to our document.AppleScript.
[Transcript missing]
Now, what it's going to do is we're
going to bring it up this time.
We're going to drag in a bunch of
several AppleScript Studio projects.
And what we're going to do is we're
going to actually put a real script,
a running script in here this time.
Now this isn't a script view,
so it's not going to check the syntax,
but I'm just able to paste
in a little script here.
So let's go ahead and put that in, John.
First thing we do is the file to
process is the file that's passed to us.
It's going to be a POSIX path,
so we have to get the alias
to it using the POSIX file.
It's a good way to transfer
from POSIX file to POSIX path.
We added that support in a couple
of versions of AppleScript ago.
We're going to go in and we're
going to tell application
because Xcode is scriptable now.
It has more work to go yet,
but there's still quite a
bit of functionality there.
So what we're going to do is
we're going to open the file,
and that's just a standard open message,
and then we're going to set the status
message because what we're going to do
is call the build last project document.
There's a build command in Xcode.
It's going to build and
it'll tell us right now,
it tells us if it succeeded or failed.
And then we return that status message,
and our code that we didn't go through
in detail will actually put the
status message in the column for us.
So let's go ahead and
we'll build and run this.
Or actually, we'll just choose now from
the file menu our process all.
And you'll see that it says processing.
It's going to tell Xcode
to open the document.
It compiles it, switches back,
and you see that it succeeded
in each of these cases.
So there you go.
We're able to run that process over
each of those items in that document.
- Now this is actually quite
useful because I can save
this as a document now,
and whenever I want to open
those up and process that,
I can.
But it's very flexible.
If I wanted to add a bunch of images,
I could drag some images in,
and that little run script could call
something to manipulate those images.
So we're going to put
this out as an example.
It'll be out there certainly
in the Panther release.
Hopefully we can put it up
sooner so you can play with it
with the code that you have.
And with that,
I'd like to thank John for his help
on that part of the demo today.
Thanks, John.
Of course, I want all my support now.
It all probably goes downhill from here
because I'll drive the rest of the demo,
so let's see what we got.
Okay, next thing, plug-in support.
I'm also very excited about this.
What we can do with Xcode Scriptability,
we can now create Studio plug-ins
that are written in AppleScript that
you can plug into Xcode and enhance
the environment in ways that we
haven't even begun to think of.
And we're able to do that.
We've added a new plug-in
loaded event handler.
And through that,
it's supported currently with Xcode.
I believe Sal's got lots of ideas
on where to plug these things in,
so just stay tuned, okay?
We've also,
in order to do anything meaningful,
we needed to add more make new support,
in particular menus and menu items,
because it's not very interesting if
your plug-in gets loaded and you can't
really do anything in the environment.
You need to at least provide
some access to your plug-in,
so this is the first steps we're
going to add more in the future.
So I want to talk a little bit
about the Xcode scriptability.
There are a set of low-level classes
that we'll have that talk about projects
and targets and file references,
and there's lots more, believe me.
And then there's the high-level classes,
documents, windows, and views.
And so we're just beginning on this.
There's quite a bit in
the preview release.
There's more to come.
And we're going to
take advantage of this.
What I'm going to do is put
together a plug-in that we're
going to add to Xcode and cross
your fingers and hope it all works.
So let's go back to our demo machine.
And what I'd like to do is
open up a different project.
Again,
there's a bit of UI involved in this,
so I didn't want to bore you with going
through the process of setting up the UI.
But I do have a nib here
that's set up already.
It's our Settings Viewer plug-in.
Now, actually,
before I get started with that,
I did want to show you one thing.
And I wanted to go back to
Script Editor and show you a
little bit of that scriptability.
So I'm going to go in
here and do a... Actually,
I'm going to open up
the nice library window.
We worked hard.
We want to make sure we show it.
So I can come in here and I can find...
Open up the dictionary for Xcode.
And you can see that there are low level.
Some of these are the build phases.
They still, unfortunately, have PB.
But the references, targets,
applications, and document views.
Lots of different suites.
They're actually quite large,
some of these.
and there's a lot to play with,
which is great.
I think that's probably the first thing
that most people do when they see a new
scriptable application is look at all the
different objects you get to play with.
A great big sandbox.
It's great.
It's lovely.
And so what we can do is
kind of play with that a bit,
and I'm going to go over and
create a new script for Xcode.
And what I want to do is just let's
look at what projects we have running.
And right now I have
Project Settings Viewer,
and we can do things like look
at the targets of projects.
Well,
let's just in this case we'll name it.
So we'll just call it Settings Viewer.
So I actually see that I have a
bundle target that's part of that,
and we can even keep drilling
further and further down.
This is where it's going to get
interesting and pertinent to the demo
that we're going to create today.
And we're going to look at the
build settings of the target.
And you'll see that there's these
funny-looking archaic constants
here with various settings.
and how I want to relate this.
You would get to the same
information from the UI itself
by going to the target,
selecting the inspector,
the target there,
and bring up the inspector.
Well, actually, in this case,
we have to look at it
in a different place.
We have to go into our editor
and look at the expert view,
and here they are.
Those are the things
that you actually saw.
Now, the cool thing is you can do
it from inside a script editor.
You can actually set build
settings or change those build
settings back in the target.
But what I wanted to do,
and I thought about the inspectors
are cool and everything,
and I have reasons for it.
Ask me later,
and I'll tell you why I think
the inspectors are cool.
But it's top-down.
You have to drill down to get to
that particular build setting.
What I wanted to do was
turn it upside down.
I wanted to go find out every
build setting that's defined in my
project and find out who defines it.
So that's not in the
application itself yet,
so I can write a plug-in to do that.
So I'll jump over, and I've called the
settings viewer plug-in.
And I open up the plug-in.
Try this again.
And what I'm going to do is bring
up my Apple script panel inspector.
And I see that there's now a new
category called plug-in loaded.
So I choose that,
and I'm going to set it on
the settings viewer plug-in.
And we'll go over and edit the script.
And we'll ignore that error.
And I have no clue what it said,
but we'll just ignore it.
And I'm going to make a new script.
And my wonderful one-handed typing here.
We're going to go off,
and I'll come back and talk about this.
And I'm going to make a new script.
In a second.
Okay.
So what I'm going to do is I'm actually
going to create this local script.
And in that script,
I'm going to put an on choose menu item.
Just like you saw back in
the last demonstration.
But it's actually now
inside of a script object.
Then the next thing I'm going to do
is I'm going to find another one of
those lovely Apple script things.
I'm going to go find the first
menu item whose title is project.
So I'm going to go over
and find the project menu.
Now I'm going to get the class browser.
And what I want to do is insert
a menu item right after the
show class browser menu item.
And what I want to do is I sort of
get a couple of references for those.
And then I'm going to
make a new menu item.
And I set it to be after
that show browser menu item.
And then I set it with some properties.
I set a title and a name.
And then finally,
you see I dynamically set the
script of that menu item by
passing it this script right here.
So what it's going to
do is when I build this,
When we actually install
the plug-in and run it,
it's going to add a menu item,
and then when I choose it,
it should present a
display dialog for us.
So we do need to, in this case,
quit Xcode.
And I'm going to bring up,
hide this for the moment,
and we're going to find the build.
And just to show you,
this is where I built the project,
and this is my plug-in.
It's an extension of PB plug-in.
And this is the local plug-ins on
my library in my user's account.
So it's library, application support,
Apple, developer tools, plug-ins.
So I just copy that over, drop it in,
and I go back into Xcode, launch that.
And now what's happened is
that that plug-in got loaded in
the process of starting Xcode.
And if I go and open up a project, oh,
let's do count down timer.
And you'll see now under the project,
it's going to say, oh,
let's do count down timer.
And then I'm going to go
back into the project menu.
This wasn't here before.
Of course,
I should have shown that to you,
because you may not believe me now.
I could if you want me to.
I'll throw the plug-in
out and we'll start over.
But let's go on.
So now when I choose this,
if all is working well,
it actually will display my
dialog so that at least I know
I've got the plug-in loaded.
Okay, well that's not very interesting,
and that certainly
doesn't get the job done,
so let's go and finish
working on that project.
So I'm going to go back in,
I'm going to open up my
Settings Viewer plug-in,
and this time we're going to go into the,
much easier to sort it this way,
and I'm going to go into
the Settings Viewer itself,
and I'm going to describe a little
bit about the UI for this plug-in.
When you choose that menu item,
I'm going to present this outline view,
and I'm going to go through,
and I'm going to ask
every single project,
or ask the project, ask every target,
ask every build phase,
everything I can possibly
ask for its build settings.
And then I'm going to list the
build settings as top-level items,
and then child items will be added as,
from the, whoever defines those
particular settings,
and that's the way that this should look.
And so what I need to do is
actually add an event handler,
and I want to know when
this window gets opened,
because we're going to add
something back in our menu.
And so I'm going to go into our
menu item chooser to do that,
to load the nib for us.
So I go in here,
and we'll click on the open,
and this time I'm going to
put it in the Settings Viewer.
And since there's a
little bit of code here,
I'm actually hopefully going
to be able to do this right
and drag in our snippet one.
Now, this is a little bit of code here,
and what I want to describe is that we,
in this case,
we need to use the terms from Xcode,
and we're going to fix this as just a
limitation of the current implementation.
But what we want to do is get
the last project document,
and I'm going to do a
little bit of call methods.
I do a lot of this.
Sal scolds me, but, you know,
I'll learn sooner or later.
But again, I use that string by
deleting path extension.
It's so simple.
It's just one call.
I know it's there, so I want to use that.
And then I've got a
little spinning indicator.
You didn't see it,
but it's a little progress
indicator up in the view,
and I'm going to tell it that
I want to use threaded animation,
so it just spins on its own.
I don't need to tell it to do anything.
And then I'm going to start
that indicator spinning.
And then what I'm going to do is
there's a little status text field.
I guess I could show these
where these things are here.
There's actually a
little indicator there,
and there's actually a
little status indicator here.
And I'm going to set
that status right here,
passing it in the project title
that we're currently looking at.
We have update the object.
That's to tell it to redraw.
Please ignore the delays.
There's one that's just a little kludge,
but okay.
On to outline view
settings and scroll view.
We get the outline view
out of that window,
and then we get the data source.
We make a new one,
just like we did before.
We make a new data source.
We're going to create three new columns,
name, kind, and value.
And then, again,
we're going to set that data
source of the outline view.
And then we're going to
call a couple handlers here.
One is called find settings
for items in project.
So we're going to pass it the project,
go find all those items.
And then we're going
to expand the settings.
What I want to do is find every
setting that's defined more than once,
so I can look at, like, build styles.
Check development versus deployment,
and you'll see how that works.
And then at the end,
we're going to turn off
the progress indicator.
And then we're going to update the
status of the field to clear it out,
or at least set the project title there.
Update the object.
Ignore the obvious
kludge with the blazer.
That's to make sure
that it draws correctly.
All right.
Trust me.
It's needed, but we'll fix that.
So that part is in there.
We actually need to add
a little bit more here.
Resize this down.
We need to add these two handlers and
any supporting items that go with that.
So hopefully it's this piece
that I've got copied off here.
All right.
And so what it's going to do, again,
we have to use the using terms block.
It's going to turn off the updating
just like we did before because
we're going to add some data to it.
And, yes,
it's going to do some call methods
that I've added to this project,
repeats through each of the build styles,
adding those settings,
reprocess each target,
adding those build settings.
And if I would like,
I could go actually find every
build file and get its settings.
So what it's going to return me is a
whole data source populated with all the
build settings and those that define it.
And then finally at the end,
it's going to call expand settings.
And it's going to go through,
it's going to find out which
ones have more than one data
item and then expand it.
So I think it takes care of that.
And the last thing we need to do
is go back into the plug-in script.
And we need to replace
this display dialogue.
And we'll put that in.
And, again, call method.
You notice there's lots of call method.
I love it.
It's great.
It makes it easy to add things.
But this is sort of a
workaround for a bug.
We're going to fix this by the
time release comes out so that
it's easy to load a nib that's
actually now in a plug-in.
We already have support for load nib.
You just pass it load nib
in the name of the nib,
and it just works.
In this case, though,
the plug-in doesn't or the
nib isn't in the application.
It's in the plug-in.
So you need to add an extension.
We'll get that in there.
So I'm going to go ahead and build this.
and it's built,
so I'm going to have to quit again.
And we'll quit this,
and I have to go throw this one away,
'cause I don't need it anymore.
Copy that one over.
And now when I go back into Xcode,
magically appears.
Right.
Okay.
So then let's go in and let's
open up another project here.
And cross your fingers, I choose this.
It should open a window.
Spins the indicator,
goes finds all the settings,
and expands all of the settings
that are defined multiply.
So I can look and see that
ZeroLink is on for development.
It's off for deployment.
I can check all of
these various settings.
It's just a way to look at the settings.
I know this appeals to all
the engineers in the crowd,
so some of us may not get it.
But this is a very cool thing.
And we've been able to plug it right in,
take advantage of the
scriptability in Xcode.
Thank you.
Okay, back to the slides.
Future features.
Well, I won't tell you that I looked
at last year's list of future
features and did a scorecard,
so we'll just go right along here.
We're going to add make
new and delete support.
I think it's really important,
especially with things like
plug-ins and other type of dynamic,
especially with the script property,
you're going to want to be
able to create new things.
And what are some of those
new things you want to create?
Toolbars.
It would be excellent to be
able to take advantage of the
toolbars that are in Cocoa.
The reason that it isn't there
currently is that there is no way to put
toolbars together in Interface Builder,
and that's where we hook everything up.
But now that we're dynamic,
now you can see the picture, right?
We can start creating these things.
Same thing with the dock menu.
You're going to be able to support
the dock menu that pops up and add
your own items and respond to those.
Dictionary viewer.
Sometimes it's a bit difficult,
especially when you get
very large terminology.
So what we're going to do is define
the data that you need and define
the classes and the commands.
And so what we're going to do
is build on all the wonderful
things we've done in Xcode.
You can imagine a little search field,
so as you type window,
we're going to filter that for you,
or a particular code.
We're going to pull that into
the dictionary viewer and
make it a much nicer place.
We're going to be able to show you,
hopefully,
documentation examples right in
line in the dictionary viewer.
Okay.
Thank you.
Roadmap.
So obviously we've
already had some of these,
so for the disk we'll look at 401.
I had our AppleScript update.
We already had our feedback form.
It would be nice if we
had these at the end,
but that's okay.
We have our AppleScript,
and QuickTime already happened at 2.
We have a session tomorrow, 414.
This is to show you,
if you're interested,
how to make your Carbon or
Cocoa applications scriptable so that
we can take advantage and do even more
cool things with AppleScript Studio.
We'll open up much more applications,
and they'll show you how to do that.
Session 311 on Friday will show
you how to automate your testing.
With some of the things like
GUI scripting that we've provided,
you can actually click on
buttons and choose menu items,
and there's other tools that can be
used to check in and test your software.
And then in 623,
we have an AppleScript for
system administrators.
I feel like a flight attendant.
It's like, you know,
this is AppleScript Airlines.
Welcome to Flight 306.
On your tour, our final destination
is AppleScript Nirvana.
If this is not your destination,
there are exits 4 and aft.
Okay.
Whom to contact?
Well, give me a call.
Well, don't call me,
but you can send me an email.
I'll try to respond as best I can.
We have Todd Fernandez,
who is our engineering manager.
Sal Seguin.
Everybody knows Sal.
Knows and loves him.
And then we have Jason Yeoh,
who is our technology manager.
And for more information,
you can find all of these
wonderful references.
We have building applications,
which is a bit of a tutorial.
This is probably our first
documentation that we wrote,
and we know that we're
going to enhance it,
hopefully, in the future.
We're going to enhance it hopefully
in the future and make it even better.
And the Studio Terminology reference
was new with Jaguar last year.
It's a wonderful reference.
And actually,
can I switch back over to the
machine for just a minute?
Because I've had a lot
of requests for this.
It used to be in Project Builder,
it showed up right here.
It said,
show our AppleScript Studio help.
What we've done is consolidated a bit.
So you have to, unfortunately,
pushed it down a level a little lower.
You bring up the documentation viewer,
but we get to be at the top of the class.
We're first thing AppleScript.
And you can actually just come in here
and find out about AppleScript Studio,
the references, they're all right there.
And you actually even can take
advantage of some of the searching
features to get to that help.
Okay, we go back to the slides again,
thank you.
Release notes.
Every time we send out a revision,
we didn't get them in
the 1.3 preview release,
but in the final release,
we'll make sure we have a
good set of release notes.
There is also lots and lots.
I think I have 33 examples at this point,
and I will keep adding more of those,
the ones you saw today
and other examples.
That's probably your best resource
when you're getting right into it.
Go open each of those examples, build it,
run it.
We try to be very specific to the
tasks that we're trying to demonstrate.
And of course, there's a studio website
that's updated all the time.